## Project Summary

The intersection of speech sentimentality/complexity and data science is a vast field, and while working on this project we encountered a number of interesting potential extensions of the analysis and research we conducted. Although we found an online corpora of presidential speech data, much of the time spent working on this project was dedicated to cleaning up the missing pieces of our dataset. While we were overall thorough and successful in this process, there is still room for improvement in terms of cleaning the extensive amount of linguistic data we processed. Doing so would likely improve the accuracy of the numerical features we extracted, and lead to more reliable results. 

The central aim of this project was a wholistic analysis of trends in presidential speech complexity and sentimentality (particularly with regards to progressivist themes) over the entire history of the presidential office. In terms of speech readability, we realize that this leaves some room for data normalization; the Flesch-Kincaid tests were created in the 1940s, and favor components of speech such as short sentence length and short word length. Likewise, the favoring of easily digestible language via simple syntax is commonplace in the production of speech-writing today (as one theoretical goal of the president is to be able to communicate to every American, regardless of literacy level). However, the office of the president has changed over time, and in its beginnings the realm of political discussion was largely reserved for the elites; our data is reflective of this trend, as demonstrated by our readability visualizations, with most of the early presidential speeches falling into the "very confusing" level of complexity. However, we believe that a thorough understanding of readabilty cannot ignore the temporal nature of rhetoric, as linguistic standards have changed over time, and are thus difficult to summarize with one modern readability score. Thus, we suggest an in-depth presidential speech readability analysis which takes into account the average readability of speech at the time a given president was in office -- this normalization would be very tricky to accomplish, as one would need a statistically significant sample of rhetoric during each time period, but it might lead to a more accurate picture of the complexity of presidential speech relative to his or her time in the executive branch.

We also suggest further research into presidential candidate rhetoric, such as evaluating the differences in readability and sentimentality between the candidates of one election. Moreover, we think it might be interesting to track these features in a case study of a single politician, to see how the nature of their rhetoric changes over the course of their political career. For example, one might consider whether candidates use more polarizing language when running for office than while in office. A hypothesis in favor of this correlation is loosely suggested by our word cloud visualizations, as we found that the primary thematic elements present in both Democratic and Republican presidents' speeches (post-1961) were broad ideas of American unity and progress. This is consistent with the general role of the president as a unifying central figure, but contrary to the party platform-specific rhetoric we have come to expect from our ever-polarized leaders.

## Model Performance

The numerical models performed poorly, with the peak average accuracy for time period, party, and identity being 31.39%, 37.52%, and 18.25% respectively. This lets us know that the identification of these targets is very difficult based off of the numerical data we extracted from the speeches. However, giving the models text vectorized off of importance within speeches, our models' performances dramatically increased. First, we ran through different iterations of tweaking the sensitivity of the vectorizer with different models, then we used the best overall performing model with even more iterations of the vectorizer. In the first stage, there were clear signs of overfitting in several cases. This was demonstrated through the 100% accuracy score obtained on the training set, despite a much lower accuracy for the testing set; this occurred on 83/210 of the initial model iterations.  Despite this, the k-Nearest Neighbors algorithm proved to be the most accurate (out of the 17 models above 70%, kNN was 5 of them). A revised model-iteration test included LogisticRegression models, which proved to be more effective than kNN (8/17 above 70%). Due to time and resource constraints, we did not use logistic regression in our final model, but we suggest this as a potential improvement/extension of this research. After selecting kNN, the vectorizer iterations were also successful, with 41/144 iterations giving a test accuracy of over 70%. Evidently, once we began the vectorizer iterations, there were no obvious cases of overfitting (defined as a testing accuracies of 100% or a testing-training accuracy difference of >50%).

Overall, we were able to successfully predict the political party and time period using our models, and had moderate success with predicting the speaker's identity of a given speech. We found that it was rather difficult to predict speaker identity, and this could be for a number of reasons; for example, some presidents gave a lot more speeches that others (ex. Trump had 34 speeches while Harrison, who died in office after a month, gave 1 speech). The best accuracy from our vectorizer iterations for political party was 84% train, 76% test; for time period: 85% train, 79% test; but for president: 81% train, 64% test. The best accuracy from our model iterations for political party was 89% train, 73% test; for time period: 81% train, 76% test; and for president: 73% train, 61% test.

## Hypothesis Testing & Interpretations

In the context of our dataset, obtaining significant results indicates an observable connection between a speech target variable (such as the importance of female-gendered terms) and a speech outcome variable (such as the political party of the speech's speaker).

Hypothesis 1 : Our results indicate that there is a significant increase in the importance of female gendered terms in presidential speeches over time. Having significant differences in regards to our data means that the tfidf value of female-gendered terms shows an increase in correlation to time, which is why we found a test statistic value greater than 1, and a positive correlation value between the two variables.

Hypothesis 2: Our results indicate that there is a significant decrease in the importance of male gendered terms in presidential speeches over time. Having significant differences in regards to our data means that the tfidf value of male-gendered terms shows a decrease in correlation to time, which is why we found a test statistic value greater than 1, and a negative correlation value between the two variables.

Hypothesis 3: Our results indicate that there is a significant decrease in the importance of religious terms in presidential speeches over time. Having significant differences in regards to our data means that the tfidf value of religious terms shows a decrease in correlation to time, which is why we found a test statistic value greater than 1, and a negative correlation value between the two variables.

Hypothesis 4:  Our results indicate that there is a significant decrease in the importance of terms relating to equality in presidential speeches over time. Having significant differences in regards to our data means that the tfidf value of  terms relating to equality shows a decrease in correlation to time, which is why we found a test statistic value greater than 1, and a negative correlation value between the two variables.

Hypothesis 5: Our results indicate that there is a significant difference in the use of religious terms between political parties (we only examine modern democrats and republicans for relevancy sake). In terms of our data, this means that there was a significant difference in the number of terms for religion used in speeches labeled as being from these political parties.
